---
title: 📚 BOOK: Reinforcement Learning, Sutton & Barto (2018)
subtitle: Rating: 10/10 | Intermediate to Advanced AI Scientist
date: 2026-07-02
---


I had touched a few chapters of this uber-classic a few other times before — for instance, the first edition when I was taking graduate classes on **[machine learning](https://github.com/future-ai-org/ml-classifiers-and-experiments-py)** and **[robotics](https://github.com/autistic-symposium/robotics-matlab)** during my **[PhD at Stony Brook](https://www.astro.sunysb.edu/steinkirch)** a decade ago, or later when I was looking at **[training DeFi agents with Markov Chains](https://mirror.xyz/go-outside.eth/DKaWYobU7q3EvZw8x01J7uEmF_E8PfNN27j0VgxQhNQ)**.

But now, as I juggle deep research and the engineering work of building **[NULLSTAR](https://www.nullstar.games)**, it felt like the right time to read the book in full, even if only to "open space in my brain for its content, and then refine and deepen it later through future development". In other words, it's an advanced reading, so I consider this first pass a fun and enlightening exercise, and I will probably come back to it many other times during my research in the years to come.


##### 💜🤖 Below are my highlights (with some attempt, although very moderate, at coherence).

<br>

---

## 🧑🏽‍🩰 Introduction to RL

<br>

- Reinforcement learning is a computational approach to understanding and automating goal-directed learning and decision making. It’s distinguished from other computational approaches by its emphasis on learning by an agent from interaction with its environment, without requiring exemplary supervision or complete models of the environment.

- RL uses the framework of Markov decision processes to define the interaction between a learning agent and its environment in terms of states, actions, and rewards (featuring cause and effect, uncertainty and nondeterminism, and explicit goals).

- Elements of a RL system: a policy (the learning agent’s way of behaving a given time - it could be a simple function or lookup table or a search process), a reward signal (defines the goal or a reinforcement learning problem, and the primary basis for altering the policy, in general they may be stochastic functions of the state of the environment and the actions taken), a value function, and optionally a model of the environment.

- Dynamic programming is the only feasible way of solving general stochastic optimal control problems - it suffers from the curse of dimensionality (its computational requirements grow exponentially with the number of state variables).

- John Tsitsiklis (1996) coined the term “neurodynamic programming” to refer to the combination of dynamic programming to artificial neural networks.

- Alan Turing (1948) described a design for a “pleasure-pain system” that worked along the lines of the Law of Effect: “When a configuration is reached for which the action is undetermined, a random choice for the missing data is made and the appropriate entry is made in the description, and is applied. When a pain stimulus occurs all tentative entries are cancelled, and when a pleasure stimulus occurs they are all made permanent.”


<br>

---

## 🧑🏽‍🩰 Multi-Armed Bandits

<br>

- RL, when comparing to other types of learning, uses training information that evaluates the actions taken, rather than instructs by giving correct actions. Purely evaluative feedback indicates how good the action taken was, but not whether it was the best or the worst action possible.

- Evaluative feedback depends on the action taken, whereas instructive feedback is independent of the action taken.

<br>

### A k-armed Bandit Problem (a slot machine with k levers)

<br>

1. You are faced repeatedly with a choice among k different options or actions
2. After each choice you receive a numerical reward chosen from a stationary probability distribution that depends on the action you selected - each of the k actions has an expected or mean reward given that that action is selected (the value of the action)
3. Your objective is to maximize the expected total reward over some time period, to time steps (the action on time step t is At, and the reward Rt)

<br>

- If you maintain estimates of the action values, then at any time step there is at least one action whose estimated value is greatest —> greedy actions. If you select one of these actions, you are exploiting the current knowledge of the values of the actions (maximizing in the current step). If you select the nongreedy actions, then you are exploring (maximizing in the long run).

- Action-value methods: methods for estimating the values of actions and for using the estimates to make action selection decisions. The true value of an action is the mean reward when that action is selected. Greedy action selection always exploits current knowledge to maximize immediate reward.

- The advantage of epsilon-greedy over greedy methods depends on the task. With noisier rewards (larger variance), it takes more exploration to find the optimal action, and epsilon-greedy methods should fare even better relative to the greedy method. If reward variances were zero, then the greedy method would know the true value of each action after trying it once. In this case, the greedy method might actually perform best because it would soon find the optimal action and then never explore.

- How to efficiently compute action values as sample averages of observed rewards (with constant memory and per-time-step computation)?

##### New Estimate <— Old Estimate + Step Size [ Target - Old Estimate]

<br>

- All the methods so far are dependent on the initial action-value estimates Q1(a) —> these methods are biased by their initial estimates

- Exploration is needed because there is always uncertainty about the accuracy of the action-value estimates.

- Grandient bandit algorithm —> a stochastic approximation to gradient ascent (each action preference would be incremented proportional to the increment’s effect on performance). The measure of the increment’s effect is the partial derivative of this performance with respect to the action preference.

- Nonassociative tasks: when there is no need to associate different actions with different situations -> the learned either tries to find a single best action when the task is stationary, or tries to track the best action as it changes over time when the task is non stationary.

<br>

-----

(work in progress)